Spicy Challenge — CyCTF 

Summary

This challenge was solved by exploiting a TOCTOU (Time-Of-Check to Time-Of-Use) race condition in a privileged backup script.
The script validated file paths first and later copied them as root. By changing what a validated pathname pointed to between those two phases, it was possible to trick the privileged copy operation into archiving a protected file from /root. After a successful race, the resulting archive contained the flag.

Reconnaissance

Running:

sudo -l

revealed that the current user could execute:

/usr/local/bin/backup_configs.sh

as root without a password.

Reviewing the script showed two clearly separated phases:

Validation phase

Reads a list of file paths

Checks that each path:

Exists

Is a regular file (-f)

Is not a symlink

Matches allowed extensions

Creates a temporary directory

Copies each previously validated path into it using cp

Archives the directory using tar

This separation between validation and copying is a classic TOCTOU pattern.

Key Observation

The script validates file paths first, but later reuses the same pathnames when copying files as root.
If the file a pathname refers to can be changed after validation but before copying, the copy phase may operate on a completely different file than the one that was checked.

Attack Concept

The goal was to ensure:

The validation phase always succeeds

The copy phase sometimes reads a protected file

This was achieved using a proxy path combined with atomic directory-entry swaps.

High-level idea

Provide the script with:

A stable, benign file (always valid)

A proxy path that can be swapped atomically

During validation, the proxy path always points to a benign regular file

During the privileged copy phase, the proxy path may temporarily point to the protected target (e.g., /root/flag)

If the timing aligns, root copies the protected file into the archive

Why Atomic Swaps Are Required

Naive approaches like deleting a file and recreating it as a symlink failed because:

There is a brief moment where the file does not exist

If validation encounters a missing file, the script aborts

To avoid this, the exploit must ensure the proxy filename always exists.
This requires atomic directory-entry exchange operations, which replace one directory entry with another instantly, without an intermediate missing state.

Tools and Constraints

No compiler available

Python was unreliable or unavailable

Perl was available and sufficient

/usr/local/bin was not writable, so PATH hijacking was not possible

The solution relied entirely on user-space tools and atomic filesystem operations.

Exploitation Steps (High-Level)

Prepare an input list for the backup script containing:

A stable benign file

A proxy file located in a writable directory

Initially create:

The proxy as a regular benign file

A separate filesystem entry pointing to the protected target (e.g., a symlink to /root/flag)

Run a tight user-space loop that repeatedly atomically swaps:

The proxy filename

The privileged pointer entry

This guarantees:

Validation always sees a valid regular file

Copy phase may follow the swapped entry to the protected file

Repeatedly execute the privileged backup script.

After each run, inspect the produced archive:

If the proxy file content differs from the benign file, the race succeeded

Extract the proxy file from the archive and read the flag.

Reliability Considerations

The atomic swap prevents validation failures caused by missing files

Repeated execution increases the chance of winning the race

In a CTF environment, this approach becomes highly reliable after tuning timing

Why Other Attempts Failed

rm + ln -s toggling: failed due to transient missing-file windows

Hard links: not possible due to permission restrictions

PATH hijacking: ineffective because the script used absolute paths

Direct file ↔ symlink swaps: unreliable due to kernel behavior

The proxy + atomic exchange method avoided all these pitfalls.

Post-Exploitation Verification

Once a non-benign proxy file appeared in an archive:

The archive was extracted

The proxy file was read

The contents contained the flag from /root
